---
reference_id: PMID:17596626
title: Meta-analysis of nitrogen removal in riparian buffers.
authors:
- Mayer PM
- Reynolds SK Jr
- McCutchen MD
- Canfield TJ
journal: J Environ Qual
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2134/jeq2006.0462
keywords:
- Ecosystem
- Nitrates/analysis
- Nitrogen/analysis
- Rivers
- Water/analysis
- "Water Pollution/prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of nitrogen removal in riparian buffers.
**Authors:** Mayer PM, Reynolds SK Jr, McCutchen MD, Canfield TJ
**Journal:** J Environ Qual (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2134/jeq2006.0462](https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq2006.0462)

## Content

1. J Environ Qual. 2007 Jun 27;36(4):1172-80. doi: 10.2134/jeq2006.0462. Print
2007  Jul-Aug.

Meta-analysis of nitrogen removal in riparian buffers.

Mayer PM(1), Reynolds SK Jr, McCutchen MD, Canfield TJ.

Author information:
(1)USEPA, Office of Research and Development, National Risk Management Research 
Lab., Ground Water and Ecosystems Restoration Division, Ada, OK 74821, USA. 
mayer.paul@epa.gov

Riparian buffers, the vegetated region adjacent to streams and wetlands, are 
thought to be effective at intercepting and reducing nitrogen loads entering 
water bodies. Riparian buffer width is thought to be positively related to 
nitrogen removal effectiveness by influencing nitrogen retention or removal. We 
surveyed the scientific literature containing data on riparian buffers and 
nitrogen concentration in streams and groundwater to identify trends between 
nitrogen removal effectiveness and buffer width, hydrological flow path, and 
vegetative cover. Nitrogen removal effectiveness varied widely. Wide buffers 
(>50 m) more consistently removed significant portions of nitrogen entering a 
riparian zone than narrow buffers (0-25 m). Buffers of various vegetation types 
were equally effective at removing nitrogen but buffers composed of herbaceous 
and forest/herbaceous vegetation were more effective when wider. Subsurface 
removal of nitrogen was efficient, but did not appear to be related to buffer 
width, while surface removal of nitrogen was partly related to buffer width. The 
mass of nitrate nitrogen removed per unit length of buffer did not differ by 
buffer width, flow path, or buffer vegetation type. Our meta-analysis suggests 
that buffer width is an important consideration in managing nitrogen in 
watersheds. However, the inconsistent effects of buffer width and vegetation on 
nitrogen removal suggest that soil type, subsurface hydrology (e.g., soil 
saturation, groundwater flow paths), and subsurface biogeochemistry (organic 
carbon supply, nitrate inputs) also are important factors governing nitrogen 
removal in buffers.

DOI: 10.2134/jeq2006.0462
PMID: 17596626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]