---
reference_id: PMID:23713117
title: "Biological nitrogen fixation: rates, patterns and ecological controls in terrestrial ecosystems."
authors:
- Vitousek PM
- Menge DN
- Reed SC
- Cleveland CC
journal: Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0119
keywords:
- Ecosystem
- Human Activities
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Nitrogen Cycle
- Nitrogen Fixation/physiology
- Nitrogen Isotopes/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological nitrogen fixation: rates, patterns and ecological controls in terrestrial ecosystems.
**Authors:** Vitousek PM, Menge DN, Reed SC, Cleveland CC
**Journal:** Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rstb.2013.0119](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0119)

## Content

1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 May 27;368(1621):20130119. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2013.0119. Print 2013 Jul 5.

Biological nitrogen fixation: rates, patterns and ecological controls in 
terrestrial ecosystems.

Vitousek PM(1), Menge DN, Reed SC, Cleveland CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
vitousek@stanford.edu

New techniques have identified a wide range of organisms with the capacity to 
carry out biological nitrogen fixation (BNF)-greatly expanding our appreciation 
of the diversity and ubiquity of N fixers-but our understanding of the rates and 
controls of BNF at ecosystem and global scales has not advanced at the same 
pace. Nevertheless, determining rates and controls of BNF is crucial to placing 
anthropogenic changes to the N cycle in context, and to understanding, 
predicting and managing many aspects of global environmental change. Here, we 
estimate terrestrial BNF for a pre-industrial world by combining information on 
N fluxes with (15)N relative abundance data for terrestrial ecosystems. Our 
estimate is that pre-industrial N fixation was 58 (range of 40-100) Tg N fixed 
yr(-1); adding conservative assumptions for geological N reduces our best 
estimate to 44 Tg N yr(-1). This approach yields substantially lower estimates 
than most recent calculations; it suggests that the magnitude of human 
alternation of the N cycle is substantially larger than has been assumed.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0119
PMCID: PMC3682739
PMID: 23713117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]