---
reference_id: PMID:17365317
title: Nitrate removal and denitrification affected by soil characteristics in nitrate treatment wetlands.
authors:
- Lin YF
- Jing SR
- Lee DY
- Chang YF
- Shih KC
journal: J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/10934520601187690
keywords:
- Carbon/analysis
- Magnoliopsida/metabolism
- "Nitrates/isolation & purification, metabolism"
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Soil Microbiology
- "Waste Disposal, Fluid/methods"
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/isolation & purification, metabolism"
- Wetlands
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nitrate removal and denitrification affected by soil characteristics in nitrate treatment wetlands.
**Authors:** Lin YF, Jing SR, Lee DY, Chang YF, Shih KC
**Journal:** J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10934520601187690](https://doi.org/10.1080/10934520601187690)

## Content

1. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2007 Mar;42(4):471-9.
doi:  10.1080/10934520601187690.

Nitrate removal and denitrification affected by soil characteristics in nitrate 
treatment wetlands.

Lin YF(1), Jing SR, Lee DY, Chang YF, Shih KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Engineering and Science, Chia-Nan University of 
Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC. yflin@ms12.hinet.net

Several small-scale surface flow constructed wetlands unplanted and planted 
(monoculture) with various macrophytes (Phragmites australis, Typha orientalis, 
Pennisetum purpureum, Ipomoea aquatica, and Pistia stratiotes) were established 
to continuously receive nitrate-contaminated groundwater. Soil characteristics 
and their effects on nitrate removal and soil denitrification were investigated. 
The results showed that planted wetland cells exhibited significantly higher (P 
< 0.05) nitrate removal efficiencies (70-99%) and soil denitrification rates 
(3.78-15.02 microg N2O-N/g dry soil/h) than an unplanted covered wetland cell 
(1%, 0.11 microg N2O-N/g/h). However, the unplanted uncovered wetland cell 
showed a nitrate removal efficiency (55%) lower than but a soil denitrification 
rate (9.12 microg N2O-N/g/h) comparable to the planted cells. The nitrate 
removal rate correlated closely and positively with the soil denitrification 
rate for the planted cells, indicating that soil denitrification is an important 
process for removing nitrate in constructed wetlands. The results of nitrogen 
budget revealed that around 68.9-90.7% of the overall nitrogen removal could be 
attributed to the total denitrification. The soil denitrification rate was found 
to correlate significantly (P < 0.01) with the extractable organic carbon, 
organic matter, and in situ-measured redox potential of wetland soil, which 
accordingly were concluded as suitable indicators of soil denitrification rate 
and nitrate removal rate in nitrate treatment wetlands.

DOI: 10.1080/10934520601187690
PMID: 17365317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]