---
reference_id: PMID:23713126
title: The global nitrogen cycle in the twenty-first century.
authors:
- Fowler D
- Coyle M
- Skiba U
- Sutton MA
- Cape JN
- Reis S
- Sheppard LJ
- Jenkins A
- Grizzetti B
- Galloway JN
- Vitousek P
- Leach A
- Bouwman AF
- Butterbach-Bahl K
- Dentener F
- Stevenson D
- Amann M
- Voss M
journal: Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0164
keywords:
- Agriculture/methods
- "Air Pollution/analysis, history"
- Atmosphere/chemistry
- Ecosystem
- "History, 21st Century"
- Nitrogen Cycle
- Nitrogen Fixation/physiology
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Reactive Nitrogen Species/analysis, chemistry"
- Seawater/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global nitrogen cycle in the twenty-first century.
**Authors:** Fowler D, Coyle M, Skiba U, Sutton MA, Cape JN, Reis S, Sheppard LJ, Jenkins A, Grizzetti B, Galloway JN, Vitousek P, Leach A, Bouwman AF, Butterbach-Bahl K, Dentener F, Stevenson D, Amann M, Voss M
**Journal:** Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rstb.2013.0164](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0164)

## Content

1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 May 27;368(1621):20130164. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2013.0164. Print 2013 Jul 5.

The global nitrogen cycle in the twenty-first century.

Fowler D(1), Coyle M, Skiba U, Sutton MA, Cape JN, Reis S, Sheppard LJ, Jenkins 
A, Grizzetti B, Galloway JN, Vitousek P, Leach A, Bouwman AF, Butterbach-Bahl K, 
Dentener F, Stevenson D, Amann M, Voss M.

Author information:
(1)NERC Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Penicuik, UK. dfo@ceh.ac.uk

Global nitrogen fixation contributes 413 Tg of reactive nitrogen (Nr) to 
terrestrial and marine ecosystems annually of which anthropogenic activities are 
responsible for half, 210 Tg N. The majority of the transformations of 
anthropogenic Nr are on land (240 Tg N yr(-1)) within soils and vegetation where 
reduced Nr contributes most of the input through the use of fertilizer nitrogen 
in agriculture. Leakages from the use of fertilizer Nr contribute to nitrate 
(NO3(-)) in drainage waters from agricultural land and emissions of trace Nr 
compounds to the atmosphere. Emissions, mainly of ammonia (NH3) from land 
together with combustion related emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx), contribute 
100 Tg N yr(-1) to the atmosphere, which are transported between countries and 
processed within the atmosphere, generating secondary pollutants, including 
ozone and other photochemical oxidants and aerosols, especially ammonium nitrate 
(NH4NO3) and ammonium sulfate (NH4)2SO4. Leaching and riverine transport of NO3 
contribute 40-70 Tg N yr(-1) to coastal waters and the open ocean, which 
together with the 30 Tg input to oceans from atmospheric deposition combine with 
marine biological nitrogen fixation (140 Tg N yr(-1)) to double the ocean 
processing of Nr. Some of the marine Nr is buried in sediments, the remainder 
being denitrified back to the atmosphere as N2 or N2O. The marine processing is 
of a similar magnitude to that in terrestrial soils and vegetation, but has a 
larger fraction of natural origin. The lifetime of Nr in the atmosphere, with 
the exception of N2O, is only a few weeks, while in terrestrial ecosystems, with 
the exception of peatlands (where it can be 10(2)-10(3) years), the lifetime is 
a few decades. In the ocean, the lifetime of Nr is less well known but seems to 
be longer than in terrestrial ecosystems and may represent an important 
long-term source of N2O that will respond very slowly to control measures on the 
sources of Nr from which it is produced.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0164
PMCID: PMC3682748
PMID: 23713126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]