---
reference_id: PMID:30512067
title: "Cover Crops Reduce Nitrate Leaching in Agroecosystems:A Global Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Thapa R
- Mirsky SB
- Tully KL
journal: J Environ Qual
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2134/jeq2018.03.0107
keywords:
- Agriculture/methods
- "Crops, Agricultural/growth & development"
- Ecosystem
- Environmental Monitoring
- Nitrates/analysis
- Soil Pollutants/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cover Crops Reduce Nitrate Leaching in Agroecosystems:A Global Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Thapa R, Mirsky SB, Tully KL
**Journal:** J Environ Qual (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2134/jeq2018.03.0107](https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq2018.03.0107)

## Content

1. J Environ Qual. 2018 Nov;47(6):1400-1411. doi: 10.2134/jeq2018.03.0107.

Cover Crops Reduce Nitrate Leaching in Agroecosystems:A Global Meta-Analysis.

Thapa R, Mirsky SB, Tully KL.

Cover crops are well recognized as a tool to reduce NO leaching from 
agroecosystems. However, their effectiveness varies from site to site and year 
to year depending on soil, cash and cover crop management, and climate. We 
conducted a meta-analysis using 238 observations from 28 studies (i) to assess 
the overall effect of cover crops on NO leaching and subsequent crop yields, and 
(ii) to examine how soil, cash and cover crop management, and climate impact the 
effect of non-leguminous cover crops on NO leaching. There is a clear indication 
that nonleguminous cover crops can substantially reduce NO leaching into 
freshwater systems, on average by 56%. Nonlegume-legume cover crop mixtures 
reduced NO leaching as effectively as nonlegumes, but significantly more than 
legumes. The lack of variance information in most published literature prevents 
greater insight into the degree to which cover crops can improve water quality. 
Among the factors investigated, we identified cover crop planting dates, shoot 
biomass, and precipitation relative to long-term mean precipitation as potential 
drivers for the observed variability in nonleguminous cover crop effectiveness 
in reducing NO leaching. We found evidence indicating greater reduction in NO 
leaching with nonleguminous cover crops on coarse-textured soils and during 
years of low precipitation (<90% of the long-term normal). Earlier fall planting 
and greater nonleguminous shoot biomass further reduced NO leaching. Overall, 
this meta-analysis confirms many prior studies showing that nonleguminous cover 
crops are an effective way to reduce NO leaching and should be integrated into 
cropping systems to improve water quality.

Copyright © by the American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science Society of 
America, and Soil Science Society of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.2134/jeq2018.03.0107
PMID: 30512067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]